# CHANGELOG

# Unreleased changes

_None outstanding_

# 4.2.0 / 2023-07-25

_**Codename:** Funny number_

## Small improvements

- [#287](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/287) Add `Gauge#set_to_current_time`:
    Does what you'd expect - sets a gauge to the current unix epoch timestamp (including
    fractional seconds).

    Other client libraries have this and it's about time we did!

# 4.1.0 / 2023-03-20

_**Codename:** They finally made a point release_

## Small improvements

- [#264](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/264) Add JRuby 9.3 to build matrix:
    JRuby 9.3 was released, and added as an officially supported version
- [#273](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/273) Add Ruby 3.2 to build matrix:
    Ruby 3.2 was released, and added as an officially supported version
- [#280](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/280) Optimize incrementing values
    in DirectFileStore adapter:
    There were some expensive method calls being made multiple times when they didn't need
    to be for simple increments. This PR introduces a specialised implementation for that
    case.
- [#277](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/277) Allow use of `instance` and
    `job` labels:
    It's now possible to set the `instance` and `job` labels on metrics, where previously
    they had been reserved.

    The reason we'd reserved them is that Prometheus automatically generates values
    for them when it scrapes a target, and we didn't want to cause a collision. It
    turns out Prometheus handles that collision just fine.

    By default, Prometheus server will prepend `exported_` to them if they're present
    in the scraped data (i.e. `exported_instance` and `exported_job`). Users can set
    `honor_labels` in their Prometheus server config if they prefer the labels from
    the scraped metric data to take precedence over the labels generated by the
    server.

## Bug fixes

- [#268](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/268) Use lowercase response headers
    in Rack example:
    Rack 3.0.0 started requiring this for compatibility with HTTP/2
- [#271](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/271) Use lowercase for HTTP headers
    in middleware:
    Fixes the same issue from above in our middleware
- [#270](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/270) Small compatibility fixes in
    Rack example:
    Apple have taken port 5000 for AirPlay, so we had to move away from it. Go has changed
    how you install binaries, so we updated those instructions too.

# 4.0.0 / 2022-03-27

_**Codename:** The "barely a release" release_

This version contains a single - sadly breaking - change.

- [#251](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/251) Remove framework-specific
    route detection from collector middleware:
    In 3.0.0 [we shipped](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/issues/245) a feature
    that attempted to use framework-specific information to determine the path of the
    request in `Prometheus::Middleware::Collector`.

    Sadly, we found out after shipping it that it was prone to multiple issues. We spent
    a decent amount of time looking into them in depth, and came to the conclusion that
    there wasn't any reasonable way to fix them - the issues are inherent to the feature.

    For a full, detailed write-up of our investigation, see [this
    comment](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/issues/249#issuecomment-1061317511).

    Almost all users will be unaffected by this change, but it is breaking per the
    definition we've used for previous releases, so we've erred on the side of caution and
    bumped the major version to communicate that.

    If you use Sinatra or Grape with the `Prometheus::Middleware::Collector`, you will
    notice different `path` labels being generated. If not, this release will change
    nothing for you.

    If you want the behaviour from 3.0.0 - or any custom path label generation you'd
    prefer - we've updated [our collector middleware
    documentation](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/blob/v4.0.0/examples/rack/README.md#collector).

    **This may be a breaking change**. Labels may change in existing metrics.

# 3.0.0 / 2022-02-05

This new major version includes some breaking changes. They should be reasonably easy to
adapt to, but please read the details below:

## Breaking changes

Please refer to [UPGRADING.md](UPGRADING.md) for details on upgrading from versions
`< 3.0.0`.

- [#206](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/206) Include `SCRIPT_NAME` when
    determining path in Collector:
    When determining the path for a request, `Rack::Request` prefixes the
    `SCRIPT_NAME`. This was a problem with our code when using mountable engines,
    where the engine part of the path gets lost. This patch fixes that to include `SCRIPT_NAME` as part of the path.

    **This may be a breaking change**. Labels may change in existing metrics.

- [#245](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/206) Use framework-specific route
    info and handle consecutive path segments containing IDs in Collector:
    When generating the `path` label, we now use framework-specific information from the
    request environment to produce better labels for apps written in the Sinatra and Grape
    frameworks. Rails doesn't provide the information we need to do the same there, but we
    hope to get such functionality added in a future release.

    Our framework-agnostic fallback (which Rails apps will use) has also been improved. It
    now supports stripping IDs/UUIDs from consecutive path segments, where previously only
    alternating segments would be correctly stripped.

    **This may be a breaking change**. Labels may change in existing metrics.

- [#209](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/209) Automatically initialize metrics
    without labels.
    Following the [Prometheus Best Practices](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/instrumentation/#avoid-missing-metrics),
    client libraries are expected to automatically export a 0 value when declaring a metric
    that has no labels.
    We missed this recommendation in the past, and this wasn't happening. Starting from this
    version, all metrics without labels will be immediately exported with `0` value, without
    need for an increment / observation.

    **This may be a breaking change**. Depending on your particular metrics, this may
    result in a significant increase to the number of time series being exported. We
    recommend you test this and make sure it doesn't cause problems.

- [#220](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/220) and [#234](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/234)
    Improvements to Pushgateway client:
    - The `job` parameter is now mandatory when instantiating `Prometheus::Client::Push`
        and will raise `ArgumentError` if not specified, or if `nil` or an empty string/object
        are passed.
    - The `Prometheus::Client::Push` initializer now takes keyword arguments.
    - You can now pass a set of arbitrary key-value pairs (`grouping_key`) to uniquely
        identify a job instance, rather than just an `instance` label.
    - Fixed URI escaping of spaces in the path when pushing to to Pushgateway. In the
        past, spaces were being encoded as `+` instead of `%20`, which resulted in
        incorrect label values in the grouping key.
    - We now correctly encode special values in `job` and `grouping_key` that can't
        ordinarily be represented in the URL. This mean you can have a forward slash (`/`)
        in a grouping key label value, or set one to the empty string.
    - We validate that labels in your `grouping_key` don't clash with labels in the
        metrics being submitted, and raise an error if they do.
    - We raise an error on a non-2xx HTTP response from the Pushgateway.

    **This is a breaking change if you use Pushgateway**. You will need to update your
    code to pass keyword arguments to the `Prometheus::Client::Push` initializer.

- [#242](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/242) Move HTTP Basic
    Authentication credentials in `Prometheus::Client::Push` to separate method call:
    In earlier versions, these were provided as part of the `gateway` URL, which had some
    significant downsides when it came to special characters in usernames/passwords.

    These credentials must now be passed via an explicit call to `basic_auth` on an
    instance of `Prometheus::Client::Push`.

    **This is a breaking change if you use Pushgateway with HTTP Basic Authentication**.
    You will need to update your code to call this method instead of including the
    credentials in the URL.

- [#236](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/236) Validate label names:
    Previously, we didn't validate that label names match the character set required by
    Prometheus (`[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_]*`). As of this release, we raise an error if a
    metric is initialized with label names that don't match that regex.

    **This is a breaking change**. While it's likely that Prometheus server would have
    been failing to scrape metrics with such labels anyway, declaring them will now cause
    an error to be raised in your code.

- [#237](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/237) Drop support for old Ruby versions:
    Ruby versions below 2.6 are no longer supported upstream, and `client_ruby` is no
    longer tested against them.

    **This may be a breaking change**. We no longer make efforts to ensure that
    `client_ruby` works on older versions, and any issues filed specific to them will be
    considered invalid.

## New Features

- [#199](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/199) Add `port` filtering option
    to Exporter middleware.
    You can now specify a `port` when adding `Prometheus::Middleware::Exporter` to your
    middleware chain, and metrics will only be exported if the `/metrics` request comes
    through that port.

- [#222](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/222) Enable configuring `Net::HTTP`
    timeouts for Pushgateway calls.
    You can now specify `open_timeout` and `read_timeout` when instantiating
    `Prometheus::Client::Push`, to control these timeouts.

## Code improvements and bug fixes

- [#201](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/201) Make all registry methods
    thread safe.

- [#227](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/227) Fix `with_labels` bug that
    made it completely non-functional, and occasionally resulted in `DirectFileStore` file
    corruption.


# 2.1.0 / 2020-06-29

## New Features

- [#177](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/177) Added Histogram helpers to
    generate linear and exponential buckets, as the Client Library Guidelines recommend.
- [#172](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/172) Added :most_recent
    aggregation for gauges on DirectFileStore.

## Code improvements

- Fixed several warnings that started firing in the latest versions of Ruby.

# 2.0.0 / 2020-01-28

## Breaking changes

- [#176](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/176) BUGFIX: Values observed at
    the upper limit of a histogram bucket are now counted in that bucket, not the following
    one. This is unlikely to break functionality and you probably don't need to make code
    changes, but it may break tests.

## New features

- [#156](https://github.com/prometheus/client_ruby/pull/156) Added `init_label_set` method,
    which allows declaration of time series on app startup, starting at 0.


# 1.0.0 / 2019-11-04

## Breaking changes

- This release saw a number of breaking changes to better comply with latest best practices
  for naming and client behaviour. Please refer to [UPGRADING.md](UPGRADING.md) for details
  if upgrading from `<= 0.9`.

- The main feature of this release was adding support for multi-process environments such
  as pre-fork servers (Unicorn, Puma).
